Good afternoon E we are visiting today
Russian Shapov e Deputy Prime Minister
of the government of Tatarstan squeals and
member of the League of Free Nations and Good afternoon
E pandaphist how by the way e address
you Pan Murza this is how in Tatar well well
they say Murza a k po
I’m not offended by any fend for everything, this is how you want to
say it, because here in
Russia in Ukraine, let me then be your husband for
Russia
who lives in Warsaw,
Ukrainian pandas tell him they say it’s nice,
people like this should know, let’s say our
broadcast will be listened to by ours  compatriots of the
peoples of the Caucasus and others, they will learn that uh,
how the Ukrainian Poles are treated
Dear people,
you are watching
I raise such topics about the
decolonization of Russia about the freedom of the peoples
that Russia once captured, so I
know that you were a representative in the
Ministry of Tatarstan, which If I'm
not mistaken, he was  declared independence
in the nineties Tell us
what the path of the Tatars to Independence was there
in the nineties and how it is now
First, with your permission, I would like to
congratulate the Ukrainians
I was blown up tonight by
saboteurs from the Himers I don’t know and I have
n’t figured it out But the most  the main thing
at the head of Putin and the General and the minister
boasted like this is the most protected
this type like this for them it was like a
holy place and you see the Crimean Bridge
today today is a common holiday for the whole
world perhaps for northern caries this is not a
holiday perhaps maybe for
Lukashenko But for  everyone for all
humanity today is a holiday once again
congratulations to the Ukrainians and all
democrats for uh for this
holiday
and God grant that not only the Crimean bridge
in the future that
Lugansk Donetsk and Crimea will be liberated and the
Ukrainians will receive their
reward that the
occupiers will compensate the damage
to the Ukrainians  but let’s return to our topic,
this is a very
difficult moment in
1552,
our states were destroyed by
the Russians, now, how
cities are destroyed, how Ukrainians are destroyed,
children,
elderly people, grandparents, I even
notice that animals are destroyed behind the
parks,
there are such moments, nothing alive
remains after the bombing. That’s what
happened too  Our Kazan Khanate was destroyed in
1552, we have
been resisting for 567 years already. We are
Tatar patriots,
including those who
fought for us, the Bashkirs and the
Mokshali,
the Kumyks, as well as other peoples.
This day is coming soon in October. We
are going to celebrate all over the world.
Indeed, the loss of the state is a
very
difficult moment.  I’m happy to see
that, like Ukrainians, every day this
registry office step by step protects
protects its territory from the occupiers,
this is a very wonderful moment, it’s even
pleasant, mine, even mine After such
serious moments, we discuss with our like
-minded comrades, even
sometimes with relatives, returning
to yours  question Yes, indeed,
for many centuries,
every 50 60 70 years, our people, including
representatives of the peoples of the Volga region of the Urals,
are destroyed, let’s
say about five years ago the
Tatar language was expelled from Tatar schools, before
that they forbade us from studying history,
why is this being done by the
Russian occupiers,
this is not only in relation to  us Tatars
Kazan Tatars this is in relation to the
Siberian peoples of the
Caucasian peoples
Why did they first destroy the history of all
colonized peoples?
and this is already the first step
towards the Russification of
colonized peoples. And then,
as it was in the past, there
were forced baptisms in the past; we were
destroyed, burned, drank,
committed genocide. And now this is
no
longer being done through the education system. You
see what kind of morality 11 is coming over us
from  Kazan Tatars, this is not only not
only us, Kazakhstan, this is happening over the
Crimean Tatars
as part of Ukraine. We are also worried about them
a lot lately,
they have been
arrested
[music]
we cannot help with trumped-up cases because we ourselves are in the
same situation,
but look how much I  I remember I could be
wrong in 92, like, or 91
Tatarstan adopted a declaration of
independence, it was like that Yes, it was like that,
we held a referendum
664 percent of the
residents of Tatarstan at that time, you can
say the citizens of Tatarstan voted
for the
independence of Tatarstan, this is a very
inspired moment for us for the
residents of Tatarstan, by the way  at that
time,
about 25-30 percent of Russian speakers
voted only for the independence of
Tatarstan
in those years
I was a member of Semey,
we then adopted a universal
vote to open a Tatar
university and a university to open the
media
to build Where do the Tatars live, what
was built mosques
school gymnasium
Yes  Indeed, at that time
we had a purely Tatar spirit, we
set an example all over the world not only for
our Tatars and behind us the people of the Volga
region of Siberia and the Caucasus rose
and indeed then we had an upsurge,
but after the arrival of Putin
everything is destroyed, really everything
is destroyed, one
might say
moral genocide is being carried out over us
over the Kazan people, if I'm not mistaken, there
was even some kind of
agreement between the Russian Federation and Tatarstan, so in
February 94,
Mitimir Shaimiev Boris signed an
agreement on the
corruption of
powers between Tatarstan of Russia, this is
after the collapse of the Soviet Union This is the
first agreement of
non-water countries
in any  In the national republics there
was no serious agreement for such a dollar. Yes, there were agreements, but they were already somehow
secondary.
And in 2004, Putin did not continue it
but dismantled it. No, for the first time
from there, about 5-6
points were removed from this dollar, then another 5-  6 points
were removed and now it’s like an
empty piece of paper Well, it’s not
expensive anymore, especially
what kind of agreement can there be? If you
sign an agreement between a state republic
and our citizens go to fight
Syria, Georgia is
sent to you, Ukraine,
if you think it’s
full-fledged, they
wouldn’t fight others  states,
I always give this example that the
Empire conquers new natures and
then throws them under the name of conquest of
even new peoples, when there was, for
example, the USSR, we Ukrainians there, so the
Kazakhs themselves were thrown into a war there in
Afghanistan, for example. So now we have left
this empire, but the empire  there
are still peoples who, here she takes the
Tatars Buryat Irat Kalmyks and throws
throws the Empire is fighting with someone else’s hands, it
turns out
such moments
when it was during the Soviet Union, you
probably know the history, they
crushed the Basmachi in the Central Asian
republics, which
means you know, then it was
from Tatars that the Bashkirs were created by the Tatars, the
Bashkir regiments were created from  Turks and
destroyed the Turks of Central Asia, by
the way, these peoples still
remind us of how our fathers and grandfathers of the
Tatars of Bashkiria destroyed the Turks of Central
Asia again. We go further
200-300 ago, I don’t remember the year, too,
to conquer
Azerbaijan, the Russian Tsar also created Tatar
regiments
I, the Russian Tsar, was sent to
conquer Azerbaijan, again,
they pushed the Tatars against Azerbaijan, this
same process is still
ongoing, let’s remember,
Moldova,
Georgia, Chechen Republic, Dagestan, there
were cases of Ingushetia, Syria, now it’s
Ukraine, the same situation, the
same system works,
genocide of colonized peoples through
involvement  Armed conflicts My
brother Gemini met
or Chubey the President of Azerbaijan, he
also told my brother about this
in detail how our
fathers and grandfathers destroyed the Azerbaijanis, I
met the first president Jakhar
Dudayev, then Asan Baskhatov, Shamil Basayev
Zelimkhan Yandarbiev, and they and
they told everything about this specific thing,
really Russian
troops were led
to conquer the Chechens of the Chechen
Republic Again, we see the same situation about the
continuation with you today. And by
the way, I also looked at a lot of
dead soldiers from Tatarstan with
Turkic surnames Turkic names
Tatars Bashkirs, it turns out a lot that
I see the highest density of
dead is Buryatia Dagestan  that is,
Moscow, St. Petersburg, is not fighting, they are sending
these conquered peoples in order to kill them,
but by the way,
our leadership of Tatarstan
is trying, if possible, not to
send them somehow, but
Patrushev came, you yourself are the
closest person for this, Putin’s
came several times, crushed, strangled
ours  leadership, but send it anyway
if it’s allowed You know yourself if it
’s allowed the head if Tatarstan
becomes tough, this is what
also happened with other leaders of the
governments of other countries We
know everything, but if possible we must carry out the
work There are only public
political organizations Yes, they
are trying to hold protest actions
posted  leaflets
Yes, even
partisan detachments were created, two partisan
detachments, the
first first partner detachment was
arrested, the cases were published, they are in
prison,
I don’t know how the FSB officers could identify them,
but technology
and the second group
left Russia because
we had two groups And in this
way  very harsh repression of the system the
machine works in Tatarstan,
look, I
perceive
modern Russia as the Russian
Federation as a continuation of the collapse of the
Russian Empire in
1917,
Poland, Finland, Ukraine, then
Ukraine fell away from the Russian Empire. They were able to seize back in
91 before the collapse of Central Asia
Transcaucasia, Ukraine, the Baltic countries and
now  this is happening
somewhere it is already overdue the
third phase of the collapse of the empire so where in
Russia there are a lot of republics such
as Tatarstan Bashkortostan and others
that
Russia is still holding them only on their
bayonets they wore the repressive apparatus but
we see that Russia is losing now
on the battlefield Russia  weaker than ever, and in
Russia such processes are already beginning
that have a
destructive effect on the power of this
entire empire, and at some point it will begin to
crumble very quickly, so
my question is to what extent are the people in Tatarstan,
who are living now, who
lived in the nineties, who are now
how much do they believe in their independence
and that the egg states will be able to
live and develop, a
very good question, I was pleased
to listen to
the very first moment of your Victory
If in the near future you will expel the
Russian occupiers and your territory, including
Moldova, Georgia
if these states are expelled  from
their occupied territories This will
automatically lead to the collapse of
Muscovy The Moscow Empire
We are already seeing that the Tatars' spirits have risen, their
spirits have really risen I already
said earlier, they even created partisan
groups,
sabotage groups began to draw, but
they are already in prison while Okay,
foreign countries somewhere 17 18
protest  they are the
media they are already publishing protests
condemning
Putin’s war, they found
it in Ukraine, this has never happened before. You
understand that representatives of the world
Tatars, the secession organizations have moved away,
left All Americans Total and the Tatars and
condemn
Russia’s aggression towards Ukraine, this is a
very wonderful moment, before this they did not
support Putin  Yes, in the family,
by the way, Gazprom
financed their site. Think about it, they don’t even
need money, they don’t even need
money anymore, they are already condemning Putin, this is very, very
wonderful, they have a heart,
including them in Tatarstan and
throughout Russia, the Tatars are slowly leading
various  work in the Telegram channel
WhatsApp in general
closed Internet resources They are working
Indeed this is a very good moment
For us For us Tatars Turkic Why For
us this is a good moment we Kazan
Tatars are in second place after
the Russians
if we rise again like the nineties
it will inspire everyone to colonize
peoples and All nations will rise up behind us to
order an example will see Yes, yes, we are waiting for
this moment, by the way, when
I raise the topic about the fact that Russia
will disintegrate, about the fact that Tatarstan
Bashkortostan Sakha Buryatia will be
free There are many in Ukraine who tell me
that no, it’s unrealistic there they have everything
crushed I give an example Here was the
Soviet Union at the end of the 80s, my
father was in such a movement of hands he was called
so hands for perestroika he was called and
they too they were few of them they carried some kind of
leaflets illegally newspapers from the
Baltic countries were brought and distributed here  and
now the situation in these
national republics of Russia is very similar to the
end of the eighties in Ukraine, that is, the
people who pushed this agenda for
independence. Yes, they were repressed, they
were forced to
distribute information underground, but now it’s
all much simpler, now there is
Telegram and the Internet and also that’s who  -we’ll
talk now about thousands of
people will look at it and somewhere this
information will be deposited in them. I think that
a lot of people should be afraid. It
seems to me that I spoke there with different
people in chat roulette, they are afraid that if
they share they won’t  they will survive because the
economy will not survive, but I give
an example of small Iceland with a
population of 300,000. And its GDP per capita is
higher than in Russia. That is, if small
Iceland with 300,000 people can live as an
independent state, then why
can’t Tatarstan with several million people, how many people there are by the way?
in Tatarstan there are more
than many European states,
Albania, there are fewer people there. They
became an independent state, they went through all
this bloodshed, but the conclusion
was said
about the
organization of Ukrainian hands already 20
225 years ago, almost 30 years ago, our activists, our
leaders met, Tatar leaders
met with your representatives from
our body already  then we studied How to fight
against the imperials, a
very good
instructive moment was a year and three times the
Kazakh Tatars, we that in those years we
also sent our activists to the
Baltic countries of the
Caucasian Republic
as well as other states, a
very good point is that we are
now communicating, this is also
how much how much  people's
eyes open They understand Yes, the
Ukrainians are
protecting their territory from the occupier And
why should the Tatars
become free independent,
other colonized peoples should also be friends,
so we
raised this
[music]
problem in time, thank you very much
for our conversation And thank you for
taking the time and  to convey this to a wide circle of
readers, by the way, readers, I
also just realized this moment when everyone
was in the USSR for Europe for America We
were all Russians The USSR is all Russians and
now there in Ukraine we are not Russians We are
Ukrainians too and many are now in the
Russian Federation  I think that Russians
don’t even understand how many Bashkirs there are, And how many
Tatars are there, And how many Airatas are there,
how much sugar is there, and when will this
Russia fall apart and
independent states emerge? We see
that this is a huge number of peoples
who lived. Here in the adhesive of this Empire,
I believe I  I believe that the Tatars will succeed
Because when I was little, my
father still took me to some rallies. I
remember there weren’t many of them, they walked there, they
showed their fingers, and why are you walking there with gold with a
black flag, you’re walking there, you’re some kind of
Petliura sheep, Banderaites, and so on
all the anti-advisers, where now are all these
people who didn’t support it before,
still agreed to this independence and
understand that independence is right,
many are afraid, afraid of changes, that’s what
else, that is now at least somehow, but there is
what will happen next. People are afraid and it
seems to me  which is very correct that here is your
organization and your activities it will
expand how it
disseminates information in Russian Because
people need to be shown to people it is necessary to
convey this is very cool
so I am
for condemning the
seizure of Crimea
for supporting
Dolesk I then defended
the Ukrainians of the Crimean Taras for this I was imprisoned for three years
I was in prison in the Republic, for me
it was a shock,
it’s such a rich, hot region, they
live in poverty, that’s okay, these are social
problems. The fact that today, even in
large trees, there is no electricity or
gas, even after walking because it’s
a swamp,
and how offended these humiliated
representatives of the Komi people are  they are even afraid to
say that they represent the Komi people,
and again now the Udmurts are also not
being told that the Udmuts are the same policy of
Russification from those times of the Soviet
Union, too, Zombirova Yuri, they are even afraid to
say that they belong to which nation Well,
indeed, then already uh We have already
begun to find out  when after the collapse of the
Soviet Union it was very much during the
Soviet Union there were fairy tales and all sorts of
films Russian forests Russian fields Russian birches
Russian baths Although the bathhouse
there the Roman Empire was reborn they
did not say that the sun and this
Because if one simply burns
the Russians there are really a lot of
people the same  Kazakhs and Georgians Uzbeks Ukrainians
Belarus they were already
zombified in those years that they kind of
represent
second-rate and they should be
Follow the Russians should become Russian
and by the way very good this
second-rate raised the topic I remembered
I was little I was
born in the seventy-first  another 10 years I found the
Soviets I remember the jokes in all the
jokes the Russians were funny and the
Moldovans were stupid Chukchis in general
stupid Armenians funny Georgians funny That
is, all the peoples in Soviet jokes
were somehow so
comedic But they were Russians,
this policy too We had this
that people come from the village to the city, they
grew up with the Ukrainian language, but in the city
they begin to speak Russian so as not to
seem that they are Ukrainians so that they
don’t look at them
askance. Are you some kind of second-rate silyuk, that’s
how you exist too? What they didn’t perceive  people who
don’t speak Russian
after the army We have four brothers We
came from the Azerbaijani region from the village
to the city of Naberezhnye Chelny Well, where
KamAZ is produced, the
largest city in Tatarstan
When we arrived in the village, we previously
only spoke purely Tatar,
even the residents spoke  in our village there
were Russians, they also
spoke purely in Tatar form,
that’s when you were in transport or in a store
when you were lucky. When we started a conversation between
our Tatars. They Russians told us that you are scribbling in a
foreign language. You see, we are
speaking in our native language, they
say that you are scribbling. Stop,
in short,  you speak your own language and on your own land,
yes. Well, I can also remember
such a moment, I lived in Kiev for six months.
Well, sometimes there are such moments. Sometimes
someone asks us for an address or time, I
ask, well, in purely Russian, I
ask Ukrainians, I am purely in
Ukrainian  language gives the answer I think
Well done Ukrainians
And by the way, well, I’ll say that
you were in prison in Russia, they put you in prison
in what year
94 I was imprisoned in
214, I was imprisoned in the seventeenth
year for three years I was in prison and in
the seventeenth year I was released in December
You left Yes  from Russia now it
turns out Well then, after
the liberation, I won’t tell you my first and last name,
Lieutenant Colonel of the FSB,
he was once in our ranks, but he
supported us behind the scenes, he said
Professor Filevich, you leave the
republics of Tatarstan, Russia, they found
you excited, this time
you will get 4-  5 years is no longer a general regime, but a
strict regime.
I ask, as a friend, I, as your comrade-in-arms,
leave this Tatarstan on behalf of I had to
leave Tatarstan. When I arrived in the
city of Kiev, I was met by
Rifat Chubarov Mustafa. Thank you very much for
the first time, they helped very seriously,
including the Kazan Tatars  who
live, they are already citizens of Ukraine, they also
helped, I was there at the point of
the year, I was very active, I was
invited by a lot of television companies,
the form of an agency for the sake of broadcasting newspapermen, I
did political work
for six months, I lived and I only had leftovers
from the Ukrainians.
I didn’t see any fascism there, of
course.  And in Russia there are just people
there and Central Asia from the Caucasus, they are not
respected, they are called there with some
words like that. What is there in Russia,
well, here I am, just let’s just say in the
center of the city When the event was held
with the Crimean Tatars
Crimean Tatar Turks and Muslims
during the offensive I say Allah
Akbar or Assalamualaikum publicly if
so if at some public events
uh in the cities of Russia you say such
words
directly to the camera there
is absolutely no such thing, there is
absolutely no interethnic confrontation,
but again 24  hours a day
Propaganda Russian labor that there are
Nazis and fascists in general even
recently I started an
Internet resource even children began to watch
this horror zombified small children
it’s no good at all it’s a
total nightmare This is the same as what
Hitler’s Germany had that is
state Propaganda  pumps
up pumps up that everything is around
in the world Bastards It's just the Third Reich And
then everything in the world Bastards only
Russia is against everyone, that's their
concept But look, by the way, in
Tatarstan, the power structures there are the
FSB police, the prosecutor's office, they're mostly Tatars
or they're  There are a lot of Russians
in the civil structure where the
head of the city is the head of the city administration
city measures are mostly
Tatars for almost eighty-five years,
including the majority of Tatars from the
power structures, mostly Tatars, yes
here it turns out If if And when
Tatarstan gains independence,
in fact, this entire power apparatus
will be able to become  just like in Ukraine it was, that is, there
was the KGB Yes, it was then
reformed there into the
Security Service of Ukraine, some of the personnel
were fired, some remained.
How would you rate it? You will need to rebuild all the structures
from scratch when Tatarstan gains independence,
or simply the
existing republican structures,
they are transformed already in the structure of an
independent state
but for us public politicians,
we have been talking about this for a long time, we are
discussing it, we are even discussing
it with the Tatars and reserves, the Chuvash and the
Bashkirs,
indeed,
if my
Tatarstan, Bashkortostan,
Mordovia,
Udmurtia become independent
states, then we will have to
do a purge,
let’s say today they are
brazenly deporting
our residents.  Tatarstan to fight
against the Ukrainians, we should not
forgive the same people. You must bear
responsibility for this, someone
in the past. We know in the past, then
publicly. Even some did not publicly
support the independence of Tatarstan. We
all know. These are the people who need to
be brought to power,
but now in  schools in Tatarstan, the
Tatar language As I understand it, he studies it
as a foreign language. It seems like that, that is,
several hours a week, two hours, but it’s
optional, it’s the same disgrace, it turns out that
mathematics and physics are not studied
in Tatar, the
topic of education
was then when Gris Tatar was in Seaamerica,
we unanimously voted that  for
the Tatars
to open to create a
university of a university of higher
education, we were indeed able to
achieve, but after the arrival of Putin
they closed in those years, the Tatars
felt that it was the
Kazakh Tatars who felt that
with the opening of
higher educational institutions, we Tatars can
our children of Tatars be able to study in
higher educational institutions in those years
thousands of
Tatar gymnasium schools opened,
hundreds of thousands of
parents gave their children to the
Tatar gymnasium school,
and when they
began to close above institutions,
all
our parents began to take their
children away from the Tatar gymnasium schools. Yes,
because the university is still in
Russian, but it turns
out in Russian, but again  the same collapse,
if the Tatar university is purely there,
history is there, and electives are there,
everything is there, I won’t re-shoot it, you
know, from Russian chauvinists, it
can’t be Science in the
Buryat language in Tatar That’s how it
can’t be eaten  Well, the
Turkish language is also Turkic, so it is
close to the Tatar language. Why can the Turks
run universities and schools in Turkish? The
Tatars can’t, it’s all the politics of
this Russian Shonism, which
wants to bring everyone down and so that your
children there, grandchildren, then call themselves and the Russians
there  there were 140 million
but yes there is such a moment
we are about 300
million Turks We are not communicating with
you
in Turkey they work higher for the institution
they come from all over the Turkic world
and again the Turkish
gymnasium schools worked
throughout Russia but again after the arrival of
Putin all of them
expelled back sent to Turkey Well,
under the guise of something like Russia, an
ideology under the Turkic is spreading
under this slogan, they expelled all the
Turks, we
helped open gymnasiums in Tatarstan, there
were such moments then our finances were
very good. We even sponsored and financed these Tatar
schools, gymnasiums, Turkic gymnasiums.
look at the natural resources in
Tatarstan, they produce oil and gas there, or I
know in Bashkiria there is oil in
Bashkortostan in Tatarstan
there is an individual gas and gold there are a lot of
natural resources but again
what we extract Well,
we are colonies, every year
Tatarstan
even sends 870 billion to Moscow  with about
15 percent, only we are left with
the same thing, and then Moscow throws handouts and
says that you have these
subsidized regions there, just like Bashkortostan
is, but again we come back. By that
time, the Komi Republic,
they are much more often
natural resources, forests, gas, there are only
such people there.  in large villages there
is no gas or electricity,
even let them go, that’s where it’s
feudalism, that’s the same, but Russia
sells gas to all of Europe, yes yes But yes, but
I sell it, so often in conversations with
Russians they ask the following
question: If Russia is such a rich
country?  sells gas to the whole of Europe, that
is, it receives a huge amount of money,
then where does this money go, that
this is your village there, there is no gas,
water supply, lighting, they
don’t understand, they don’t understand that there is
Moscow with its clicking there, this
political one, who takes it for herself
on yachts on  everything and weapons
is a problem that needs to be conveyed to
people, but I think that we are like this. Step by
step we will reach out to the huge huge
masses. It’s very good that there is. You know,
many people probably perceive
people like you as Chudakov. But this is what
they say there  some kind of not What kind of
independence How Russia will disintegrate,
once upon a time we had this there Vyacheslav
blackened in Ukraine, also how he was
perceived God what independence of
Ukraine This is how the Soviet Union
will disintegrate and then the
Soviet Union collapsed and it turned out that
Yes, this man carried a lot  the right
ideas and the more such people there are,
I call people like you like such
lighters,
as long as they exist they can light up other
people and they will light up other people and the
more such lighters there are, the faster
this darkness will dissipate because everyone will
light up And when  now a person will
already shine in his soul. You
can’t take this away from him, yes, yes, I
remember so beautifully. You, this
Leninsky, this small
newspaper was called Iskra and it turned out to be a
Revolution, yes, that is, the logic is the same, yes.
But look at Tatarstan. As I
understand it,
Tatarstan and Bashkortostan they are separated from the
other Turkic peoples of Kazakhstan by
a strip of regions of the Russian
Federation Orenburg, if I'm not mistaken, the
Orenburg region was also once
Kazakh. Yes, these were all territories that
were inhabited by Turkic peoples,
this is the power of the Fri-Turkic lands this time, but I
want to complement your words  your
proposals to help the republics live
three Turkic peoples Tatars Bashkortostan
Chuvashia Chuvash Christians but they are Turks
I don’t know that they are Turkic
Christians
we’ve been working for three years already the video has
even appealed to the head of the Republic of Bashkortostan at that time
but he was immediately crushed by Moscow
curators
such a situation But in  that time
was such a favorable moment for us, the
Kazakh public leaders of the Kazakh
society political leaders supported us very
seriously, a lot of
organizations they are just waiting for this
moment for the
Volsky peoples, namely the Tatars of
Chuvashia Bashkiria, to join
through the
Orenburg corridor. By the way, in terms of language,
you are Tatars  can you understand the
language of the Bashkirs, the Kazakhs, the Azerbaijanis,
the Turks, how close they are,
we communicate without an interpreter, let’s say with a
Bashkir, we have absolutely no problems
with the Chuvashina. Yes, there are a few
problems. We
need a translator, but the Egors are absolutely
from the Balkars,
the Azerbaijanis can communicate with the cities
that are in China,
we also carry out political work with
Kazakhs also communicate calmly and freely
with Uzbeks, too, but it turns out
with Almost the entire Turkic world, for the
most part, we communicate without
an interpreter. This is a very good wonderful
moment. For us, this is the same as we, for example, have
Slavic peoples. Maybe there are Ukrainians and Poles there.
Even if they communicate in such a huge
number of words  we will understand each other
Yes, we do the same too
But look now, I understand that
Turkey So it
claims so secretly to be the
leader of the
panther of someone in the world and, in principle,
Erdogan, I see that he is pursuing such a
policy. Why help the Turkic people
which
Central Asia is located in Russia How do you
assess the
influence of Turkey
in helping the
Turkic peoples of Russia gain freedom?
First of all, I’ll say why
the post-pres of Tatarstan, the very last one, was
liquidated in our republic,
firstly, at that time the president of Tatarstan
supports Nursultan Nazarbayev,
the president of Azerbaijan, the
president of Turkey  the Erdogan regime also
other Turkic presidents and others
also other presidents of a democratic
state because of this, the very last
post of president of Tatarstan was abolished
now I am returning
to Turkey
for all the Turks there was such an
inspiration they received when Turkey
helped Azerbaijan
liberate
Karabakh when
so many
political even ordinary Turks
united as spiritually Psychologically,
this is
from those times,
in principle, he doesn’t walk upside down,
looks, but somehow already feels
proud and the second moment was like this, it
seems like it was seven eight months ago or
something, public speeches Berdagan showed a
map of the
Turkic world there almost  more than
half of the land of the Turks is the second moment of the
Draturks of Russia to make
them feel that they and their
Land, that this is their native
Motherland is occupied by the Russians,
then the
Turks of Russia
Zira is a very big deal by showing a map of the
Turkic world
So let’s finally say that
you would like to wish everyone  to viewers from
Ukraine who are watching us to viewers from
Russia, some thoughts, here are wishes.
I want that in the
coming months
before the New Year,
you Ukrainians, Ukrainians, expel the Russian
occupiers from your territories,
and so that next year the
Turkic peoples see in the spaces of the
occupied territories of Muscovy
free independent
states of the Republic not only
Turkic peoples film and Russian peoples
as well as other representatives of peoples,
including the same Buryats
who are fighting
for Putin, of course it’s a pity, but I want there to
be peace, that the
future Republic lived like
European countries, peacefully
helped each other,
cooperated, that they had
economic political
historical spiritual  that the proximity
Hai are alive Vilny Ukraine Yes When And how by the
way, here we Ukrainians have a
slogan there Glory to Ukraine hero of the word
There is some kind of greeting among the Tatars
which is a national greeting somehow
or are you communicating in this Salaam Aleikum
there is such a word
freedom I want  tell all all the Turks
7 colonized people of
Muscovy Azatlyk we
will know correctly I by the way recently also
broadcast and some guy from
Bashkortostan also found out We were talking about words
He said that the word pencil is from the
Turkic Kara black there is even a stone I
actually looked at the dictionary
shows that  this is from the Turkic language before it
came very interesting. By the way, we
have a lot of words in the Ukrainian language
that came from the Turkic because
our peoples were neighbors, they
exchanged culturally and I believe that We
Ukrainians should not just stand on the
sidelines and watch what is happening there in
Russia, but  we must help the peoples of
Russia to gain independence just as
Europe and America once helped
Ukraine with the help of the Baltic crane because in
our own interests many Ukrainians
say that let the
Tatars figure it out for themselves Bashka Bashkorts and forge
them, they are not interested in us. I say no,
because  if we leave Russia, within
these borders of which there is an Empire, even if
Putin is removed in 20 years,
new Stalin Putin Khrushchev will be born there, so this is
the territory of the Empire, it will
give birth to an emperor, and therefore
the only way is we must help
all these peoples gain their
independence and build with  these
independent states have their
friendly relations I believe in the Tatars I believe
in the Bashkortos I believe in Sakha I believe in the Buryats I
believe in the Caucasus there it is All nations are waiting in the
wings because the Empire is weakening and
this means that soon we will have a spring of
nations I really wish your people the
prosperity of Independence because  that it is
in an independent country that you can
feel the fullness of the national
Renaissance as in Ukraine Why are the Russians
raging that Ukraine exists because
other nations see that it is possible
to develop without Russia Ukraine is developing very much
And I believe that Tatarstan
will also develop
Thank you very much for the conversation we had
in  guests of the Russian Shaps Deputy
Prime Minister of the Government of
Tatarstan in exile Member of the League of
Free Nations Thank you very much
Murza Rafis for taking the time to let
our viewers see and understand what is
happening in Tatarstan, what is happening to the
Tatar people and what is their path to
Independence Thank you very much
[music]
I think everyone who watches will be inspired by the
Ukrainians and Tatars and other peoples
with positivity and will move towards a common
common Victory. Thank you very much